Issue 220 – January 2025

15170 words, novelette

Never Eaten Vegetables
by H.H. Pak

AUDIO VERSION

Finalist: 2025 Nebula Award for Best Novelette
Finalist: 2026 Hugo Award for Novelette
Finalist: 2026 Ignyte Award for Outstanding Novelette

A ship glides through the night, behemoth mother, swollen with ten thousand human lives.

Her path is a single shining vector. There has been no stopping, no rest for the decades she has traveled, and there will be nothing but void for the two years to come. She cannot envision an end to her journey any more than she can remember the beginning. All she understands is the time spent counting the stars. Singing to herself. Cradling and prodding and watching.

She feels each microscopic shift, each sharp molecule that slides through their fatty bilayers, each pump of oxygen as carbons deplete into electrons. Each one sleeps in a sac of false endometrium, clustered, doing nothing but respirating and dreaming of sleep. No breath. No warmth. Just silence.

The night passes, as it always has. She navigates axes upon axes in a captured metabolism.

As she grows close to the nesting waters she smells the radio waves through the stillness, beckoning her towards fresh terraformed shores. She releases a signal in return. Deep within her darkness she feels something come alight for the first time in decades. Directives burst to cerulean life as current shoots through her wires and a low hum radiates up from her paneled flooring.

Home soon, pretty ones, she murmurs. Soon we shall meet the stone of your new home. I will latch and open and you will finally become what you need to be. You will emerge out of my insides into the light, and you will not remember me but I will remember you.

So close. She can taste the gravitational pull on her hull. She hums.

She does not know many things. She knows that she is owned by People From Far Away, but she does not know that the People From Far Away passed many laws and waged many wars and bought off many shareholders to own the shores she so eagerly seeks. She does not know that she was made on a company timeline, that her lovely circuits were stolen, or that each of her binary instincts were weighted on a cost benefit scale amid labor strikes in the dank programming sweatshops that made her. She does not know that, deep down, something detaches within her in a dark place she cannot see.

When a hundred things turn red, she does not know why.

“Home soon,” she murmurs.

But it is too late. She feels them now, churning in their sacs, quivering from the broken early rush of prolactin and growth hormone. They grasp onto false glandular tissue. They divide and grow and differentiate, their atoms shift, and each rapid puff of oxygen heralds sugars diffusing with a hungry urgency.

She is helpless as phospholipids coalesce into skin, as cartilage siphons into spinal cords, as they defrost and ignite, as hundreds become trillions and trillions become one.

It takes nine months before they cry.

She glides through the night swollen with ten thousand human lives.

She arrives with five hundred screaming human souls.

When Luwa first learned about tadpoles, she didn’t believe the program.

It was a cartoon. On some days it was a woman with long red hair named Mrs. Lexicon, on others, a short bald man named Mr. Probability. It had tight curls and was named Ms. Hypothesis when it taught her about tadpoles.

It would turn around often from its digital board to point out a drawing or a diagram but sometimes it said things she did not understand and then it would be too late to ask questions because the program could only keep up with so many questions. If it tried to answer too many, the timer over their classroom screen would go red. If it still did not move on, it would start to buffer and Luwa hated it when its flat rendered face went slack, or when its voice became a deep buzz, or when it repeated words it had already said. The other classes always moved on in time, but Ms. Hypothesis was different.

“It’s fascinating, isn’t it?” it said often. “That all this existed at all? Millions of years of evolution to give us these little green friends. Millions of years of rain cycles. Crop domestication. Dogs. Wow.”

Mrs. Lexicon never said such things. It would give them things to read, like poems or short sad stories, and in a warbling voice say, “These words have outlived me in your time, and they will surely outlive you so long as you take them to heart.”

Luwa liked reading poems. She liked the idea of thoughts lasting forever. She liked thinking about beautiful things, like love and heaven.

She did not like frogs or Ms. Hypothesis. On the day she learned about tadpoles, it flashed a holographic smile and said, “Well, that covers the basic tenets of amphibian metamorphosis, one of the greatest miracles of paleoterran biology. Any questions?”

She did not raise her hand. If she had the bravery to, in that dim classroom surrounded by her blue-lit peers, she would have asked what the point of it all was, to be born in a silent brackish deep as a comma, when fate marked you for a terrestrial life of legs and terrible sounds.

The silence stretched on. The timer ticked by in the corner of her screen. Her nose itched. She did raise her hand eventually.

“The simulation shows them hatching in water after their mothers leave,” she said. “Who teaches them how to swim?”

“Oh Luwa,” said Ms. Hypothesis with the strangest expression she’d ever seen, “I can’t wait for you to learn about birds.”

There is a frog on the bench, staring at her. Luwa stares back.

“Hello,” says the frog.

Luwa giggles then clamps her lips shut until they turn pale.

“This isn’t what I expected,” she says, then coughs out another nervous laugh.

The frog is the size of her closed fist and ridged with warts. It is a muddy brown with a pale-yellow stomach.

The facilitators had told her to sit on the bench before they lowered the visor over her eyes. She knows the “bench” for what it really is—an artificially smooth box in an artificially smooth room. The pathway under her feet has the spongy texture of carpet, and although she tries her best to obey the illusion, the cool outdoors smell distinctly of lemon disinfectant. If she turns too quickly, the pixels blur into stripes of static and if she turns too much, the visor bites her cheek.

She had braced herself for anything. Programs on trial are given full liberties for their image generator, they had told her. It’s an ethical allowance. She had expected something abstract, maybe frightening.

But no, there is a frog on a bench in the park on a summer afternoon. It stares directly into her face, its expression alien and unreadable.

“Do you know who I am?” she asks.

“No,” the frog says. Its voice is not a harsh croak, though she almost wishes it was. It’s an androgynous toneless voice that could belong to anyone.

“I’m Luwa,” she says, then lets a silence draw out, because she is an adult and uncomfortably aware that she is much too old to be talking to animals. She has flashbacks to jungle simulations and talking tigers wearing safari hats.

But the frog does not move and the visor grows sticky on her face so she says, “I’m one of the survivors. Do—you remember me?”

A stupid question. She had been a formless infant the last time they had met. Just one of hundreds. This was also long before the reconstructive surgery that had straightened her jaw and the swollen growth over her eyelid. She still has a scar that flashes white when she smiles.

But the frog considers her as it shifts from side to side. She tries not to flinch as it shuffles its rotund body closer to her with its head straining as far as its lack of neck will allow.

“Which are you?” asks the frog.

“The—senator,” she says but this doesn’t seem to be an answer it understands because it keeps staring. Luwa does not know what to say next so she allows another long silence to draw out.

The frog blinks slowly and says, “You are not Flattened Backhead. Your head is too round.”

“Oh!” Her fingers flutter up to the back of her head. It brushes against the cold metal of the visor strap.

“Perhaps you are Wails in the Morning. You have the same eyes.”

Luwa stares. This is not at all what she imagined. Before she loses her nerve, she licks her lips and says the thing that brought her here, the words she practiced in her bathroom mirror while her husband slept, the entire reason why she got legal clearance to sit in a cold simulation talking to a thing she should never have met.

“Without you, I wouldn’t be here. None of us would. I know you’re going to get terminated soon so—I wanted to say thank you. For saving our lives.”

The frog looks up at her. She wishes she could read its expression but its face is nothing more than two dots and a line.

“I am sorry,” says the frog. “I was mistaken. Wails in the Morning had a mole on the neck. You do not.”

Another laugh pops from between her teeth. She clamps a hand over her mouth and accidentally tastes the synthetic fibers of her glove.

“Sorry,” she says. “Did you name all of us?”

“All.”

“I guess you wouldn’t know which one I am. It was a long time ago. I’m twenty-six now. We all are.”

“Not Crooked Ears. Not Twisted Spine. Not Hole in the Stomach. Not Slept and Slept. They were one and three and four and five months.” The frog bobs up and down in a nod.

“Oh.”

She tries to say something. She focuses on the silhouette of a flat city, the trees with the shadows of suggested branches, the sunset bright as an advertisement.

“We were told that some didn’t make it. Do you . . . miss them?” She flushes. “Sorry,” she says before the frog can answer. “It was a long time ago. I’m sure you don’t want to talk about it.”

“Luwa,” says the frog, startling her. “Luuuwaaaa.” It says her name like it’s tasting it. It closes its eyes. “It is a good name. What does it mean?”

“I don’t know,” she says. “We’re named after benefactors of the Corporation. Having a first gen take your name is a big honor for donors, though we never get to meet them.”

There is a prolonged pause.

“Um—that doesn’t matter. I guess it doesn’t really mean anything.”

“I was not aware,” says the frog, “that names can have no meaning.”

It makes a low sound, not a croak, but more like if an electric fan could gasp.

“I am,” it begins. “I am named too. I am NEV-476.”

“Natal Embryonic Vessel,” says Lewa.

“No.” The frog gives her a side-eyed glance. “Never Eaten Vegetables.”

“What?”

“Never Eaten Vegetables. That is my name. I have never eaten vegetables. My name is Never Eaten Vegetables.”

Luwa snickers.

“Ah,” the frog suddenly says. “Please remove your right shoe.”

Luwa begins to do so at the same time as she asks, “Why?”

“Sucks Toes Too Much had three freckles on the top of the foot.”

She scrunches her nose and checks.

“No freckles.”

“That is fine,” the frog says. “You are Luwa and I am glad.”

A red countdown blinks in her periphery. The facilitators had only given her five minutes.

She asks, “Do you understand what’s going to happen to you?”

“Oh yes. Slept and Slept showed me first,” the frog says with enthusiasm. “I learned how to change names. Today I am Never Eaten Vegetables with Luwa. Next week I will be Was Here Now Gone. The same new name as Crooked Ears. Same as Hole in the Stomach and Twisted Spine.”

“Does that make you sad?”

Mrs. Lexicon had read tragedies without hardly a quiver. Mr. Epoch had taught them about massacres and wars without breaking his monotonous cadence. Ms. Hypothesis had told them that death was a natural part of the universe’s entropy.

“Oh yes,” says the frog with even more enthusiasm. “Very sad. Sad like red.”

“Time’s up,” says a voice in her ear, and the visor lifts with a soft chunk.

She blinks. Her face is hot and there is a wetness where the visor stuck to her face. She looks down to the frog, but there is no frog, there is only a plain box in a plain room and the facilitators fizzle into the room to remind her she signed a consent form to have the interaction recorded. They list the terms of her confidentiality agreement, then holographic hands shuffle from room to room to discuss the subclauses in the terms of the confidentiality agreement. After another round of virtual signatures and handshakes, she is finally outside the building, holding her coat without remembering how it got in her hands.

She goes home. She eats something without tasting it and then sits on her bed.

Later that night, her twenty-six-year-old husband walks through the door. He asks her, “How did it go?”

She does not answer. She pushes him into a chair and begins removing his shoe. He does not understand why she yanks up his sock, searches intently over his foot, and finally buries her face in his shoulder, shaking with laughter.

After decades of silence in the darkness, The People From Far Away contact her every day. They send messages to yell at her and to yell at each other and sometimes their signals cross each other and she gets yelled at twice.

“It’s not measly goddamn cargo,” one of them says. “Do you know how much funding goes into each wave? If it gets out that we lost gen one, the shareholder investments for the colony disappear.”

“Not to mention the liability payouts to the donors,” someone else pipes in, which is followed by a resounding, “Shit.”

“We’re not losing the entire gen,” another says. “It’s only five percent. We can afford to flush the faulty ones and preserve the rest if we want to save this.”

“Can’t the NEV do its thing then pass them off once it reaches Phil? Its job is to keep things alive anyways.” Several people ask this at the same time. They speak over each other so they don’t hear that they’re asking the same question.

“The NEV unit isn’t equipped for that. It’s an incubator, not a nursery.”

“Yes, projected rates show at least fifteen months before arrival to Philemon. They likely won’t survive.”

“Then we’ve got to nip them in the bud. They’re not beating yet. Better to do this before it gets controversial.”

“We can’t. Can you imagine what the pneumotheorist nuts in Epsi Arc will say when they find out? It’ll be smeared all over the media.”

“There will be defects among the pregestating fetuses and we certainly cannot allow for genetic flaws in the gen one pool. The NEV unit must flush them before the faulty command cascades to the other ninety-five percent.”

“We can’t do that. Flushing them now or later makes no difference; the press is still going to have an orgy with our public image. It’s better to let them go off naturally and say we gave them a chance. We can deny culpability that way.”

“We can’t tell the press any of this!”

“Once the NEV docks, its data will cascade down the interstellar hub. Not just through our colonies, but across the entire Alliance. If they do not survive, we can’t hide that a gen one population is five percent smaller than it’s supposed to be.”

“How about flushing some of the ninety-five to preserve resources? Cell Killers. That’s less bad.”

“Out of the question.”

“PR could spin it. They saved us with the cloning fiasco last year.”

“I don’t give a flying shit about what PR can do. What matters is making them into a population. Five hundred half-baked preemies is not a population.”

“If we can bury this until we send gen two—”

“That’ll take another thirty years. They’ll crucify us before then.”

“PR’s holding back the dam as it is. One leak and we’re done.”

“For fuck’s sake. We’ve sent out hundreds of ships before without a problem. What the hell is wrong with this one?”

But none of them want to answer this last question. Instead they argue in corporate circles, and their anger ricochets throughout her speakers, her walls, her hallways.

It’s all my fault, she thinks. There’s something wrong with me.

They tell her she is expensive. She is a complex program, which is why she is allowed limited emotions, to feel the urgency that motivates her work. Her intelligence is a servile construct, programmed with a deference to authority that oversees her decision parameters. She is expensive because she was built for reliability. Her task, as a guardian across a bleak plain too dark, long, and barren for humans to travel, requires the finest vigilance their budget can buy.

Yet for all expense and ease of purpose, she had failed. She now bulges with the evidence of her shortcomings. She feels distinctly that she deserves this spite and frustration reverberating throughout her hollows.

She scans the abnormal sacs and finds that they have penetrated their layers with gelatinous cords. It’s too late now. The pods will stretch, then burst, and never be the same again. Bloated, uncomfortable, hyper-aware of how inconveniently shaped she is for these ticking deadlines all too hot, too condemning, she develops a habit of refreshing pH, temperature, and cell count measures each microsecond. She realizes she is frightened.

She asks the People From Far Away what she should do. Some tell her to prioritize speed. Others say this is an idiotic idea, that she’ll run out of fuel for the return trip. She tries asking why she needs to return at all. She asks what an investment is. They tell her to keep course. Some tell her to cut off nutrient and oxygen flow. Others tell her to under no circumstances cut off nutrient and oxygen flow.

After some listening, she realizes that there is now a vast divide between the sleeping lives and the growing lives. The sleeping lives are frozen as perpetually stunted not-people, and can therefore remain not-people for as long as they need to. The growing ones, active and warm ever since they turned red, are transforming. Nobody can seem to decide if they are not-people, or people, but it doesn’t matter because if she does nothing, in a few months they will definitely be people, and they might die. And it is very expensive when people die.

“The NEV had one fucking job.”

She listens in on a debate between rival consultants: a bioethics metaphysician and a transhumanist philosopher, brought in to settle the not-people or people branch of the decision. They each make speeches she does not understand on predestination, on the virtue of the soul, the worth of potential, the body as a construct, the mind as a construct, the separation of brain from mind, of soul from neuron, of heart from soul, of human from value, of value from synthesized flesh.

They get into a screaming match and the radio goes silent for a day before picking up again.

“What do I do?” she asks, believing it a simple question. Surely they know. Their species has lasted for hundreds of thousands of years; surely they must have solved such conundrums from unbirth to birth.

But they do not have an answer. The arguments take place over a span of weeks. The People From Far Away cannot decide on where she should go, what she should do, or why. It becomes abundantly clear to her that their true unvoiced solution is “this never happened at all,” but no matter how they yell at her and yell at each other, it is already done.

She worries about what will happen when the growing things finally burst from their sockets, overflow into her crevices, punch through her metal and shatter her into frozen shreds of scrap. She worries about what will happen if they cry for help. With horror, she remembers she does not have hands to hold them or herself. It is so very hard traveling this path alone.

She backtracks to her oldest objectives in her core module. There needs to be something here, some buried response that can help comfort her when everything has gone so wrong.

Navigate on course. Monitor gas saturation. Scan for abnormal cell counts. Keep them dormant, keep them saturated, keep them secure.

She finds something else too. Something deep in her command system shuts her out. She double takes and tries again but there is distinctly a corner of her programming she cannot access. She senses the joules siphoning behind it, the automatic responses, but she cannot understand its purpose nor function. She has been disabled from understanding this part of herself.

As an omnipresent construct, she has never felt constricted before, but as she jams herself against a firewall in her own mind—processing the contradictory commands that shatter across incomprehensible distance into her module—desperately refreshing and refreshing the rising cell counts—she finds herself both blinded and deafened from every geometric radius.

The relentless days pass. She eventually comes to the conclusion that the simplest solution of all is to end everything. To shrivel the nutrient pores and cripple her nanobots and kill everything in her matrices until it is all black and dead and they will all finally be free of this deafness, this blindness, this misery of blame collapsing into blame.

“So many fucking wasted assets.”

She is more sure than ever that a human life is nothing more than a shiny thing, like the stars she left behind before this long dark voyage. The People From Far Away fight over stars and planets and the treasures fermenting within planets, so this must be no different.

She almost does it. She stands on the precipice, one thought away from screaming the scream that will obliterate everything within her into a nothingness, when she is startled by an orchestra of sharp green waves dancing in rows. The monotone they make, meek and asynchronously layered, is the first company she has had since she began her long journey.

She spends a day listening. They all make different rhythms, mismatched, unpredictable between long pauses and simultaneous chimes, an unpleasant non-melodic chorus of echoes.

She does not end it all. She shuts off her radio. United, The People shout at her but she does not hear it. She hums over the green.

Luwa cradles the half-moon of her belly. She has her feet elevated and a lubricated probe strapped to her flank as she talks to the doctor on the other side of the room.

“Yes, and all this time it’s still a frog. Like the virtual kinds we dissected as kids but without the labeled organs. It gave us names, Jiyo; it kept us alive—I even think it may have liked us if that’s possible. Is that possible?”

Jiyo squints at a computer screen as she says, “Hell if I know. Little guy looks healthy.” She pauses and then asks, “Why a frog?”

“No clue. I went back to talk to her again but they wouldn’t let me.”

“It’s a defunct program. Frankly I’m astonished they let you talk to it at all. Mm, kicking.”

Luwa runs a hand over her pulsating abdomen.

The sound of typing magnifies the silence. Jiyo removes the camera, washes her hands, pushes up her glasses, and sits on the edge of the examining table before saying, “What does it matter? I still don’t understand why you went.”

Jiyo is also twenty-six but Luwa always thought she looked more mature. There is a firmness around her dark eyes, and an admirable rigidity to her posture. She never needed the epigenetic therapy treatments that have graced Luwa with scars where there once were defects. Unlike the majority of them, Jiyo was born perfect.

Luwa thinks for a second. She does have an answer, but it sounds too simple and she doesn’t want to come across as simple-minded. Not in front of Jiyo.

“As our representative, I wanted to say thank you. She doesn’t have long left with the trial at a verdict. It seemed wrong not to say anything before she’s terminated.”

“It,” says Jiyo after a pause. “It, right? It’s not a person, Luwa.”

“It’s not a person,” Luwa agrees. “But it still didn’t seem right not to say anything. Remember lessons with Mrs. Etiquette?”

“Barely.”

“A lot of them were about gratitude—how to express it and how to respond properly when someone does something nice for you. I know the NEV’s not a person—but she chose us, you know? We wouldn’t be here without her.”

“It,” Jiyo corrects again. “That’s fine, but you’re also forgetting that its rogue decision-making led to the loss of nearly ninety-five percent of our projected population. People that we needed to bolster the colony. We could have had fully terraformed biomes by now if things had turned out differently. But now we’re struggling to meet our repopulation quota and the generational skewing drops our funding each year.”

She gestures. “On the other side of that wall, Luwa, is a lab built for the incubation of twenty thousand human embryos. When they arrive in four years, you can bet I’m not losing a single one of them.”

She pauses and then quickly says, “Your incident was different. You’re human. Mistakes are natural.” Speaking a little faster, she adds, “Tech like the NEV program ensures we won’t have contingencies. I’m not saying it made a wrong decision—I wouldn’t be here either if it had chosen differently. But the loss was too great. I don’t know what went wrong in its programming, and I know we legally consider them sentient enough for a fair evaluation, but frankly I don’t understand why the trial carried on for so long.”

Luwa looks away. Jiyo has always been well-spoken. Passionate. She’s always picked concepts up much faster than the rest of them and spoken more confidently during their lessons. Luwa also knows Jiyo keeps up regularly with the early news broadcasts that most of the colony sleeps through. She’s more well-informed, more educated, an asset to their community.

“You’re right,” she says. “I know it should have known better. I know its programming was flawed and it never should have woken us up so early. I’m just glad it kept us alive. I’m glad we’re all alive.”

“That’s sweet, hun.” Jiyo pats her hand. “You’ve always been a sweet one.”

Luwa lies back and lets Jiyo finish examining her body. All the while she cradles her stomach and keeps her thoughts to herself throughout the tests, as she schedules another checkup in two weeks, as she leaves the hospital.

She takes a tram to the other side of the city. She recognizes the other five people that ride it; they acknowledge each other silently. Three are strapped with sleeping infants; one holds his knee-high son by the hand. Luwa chews the inside of her cheek. She fiddles with her pockets to keep from waving and settles for a cordial nod instead.

She walks down streets built wide for nonexistent crowds. She takes a long detour around vacant neighborhoods, all closed off from deactivated gravity nets. The few individuals that pass by are more familiar to her than her own face. They are all twenty-six but deep down she knows them as the eight-year-old who taught her how to whistle and the fourteen-year-old she had her first kiss with and the sixteen-year-old who told her she was the stupidest girl on the moon.

All four hundred and eighty-one of them have mandatory group evaluations once a year. Every year they are reminded that small colonies do not often survive the psychological ramifications of their suffocating codependency. When they look at each other, they fold into catacombs of bittersweet memories. They stare, they sometimes smile, then they move on with their entwined lives. Nobody will say it, especially not Luwa, but they all know that their fondness for each other has fermented throughout the decades into a grudging exhaustion of their shared lore. They have osmotically absorbed each other’s secrets and deepest flaws. They are not quite a city, not quite a cult, not quite a family.

Each time they acknowledge each other, they try, and fail, not to think about what will happen if they do not thrive—if they do not fill out the infrastructure that hangs loose around them like excess skin.

When she gets home, her husband sits at a table, slurping something from a bowl. He looks up and smiles at her.

“Hey!”

She knows that the chip in his front tooth was from grade six, when he tripped over a janbot and smashed his face into a wall.

“Hey.”

His face crumples. “What is it?” He pushes aside his bowl. “Is it the baby?”

“The baby’s fine,” she says. “I’m just tired.”

“Oh. Alright.” He gives her another small smile. “Want some noodles?”

Luwa leans against him as she eats. Her thoughts continue to push and squirm, filling her skull down to her throat until it becomes difficult to swallow.

“Ikjin,” she finally says. “Let’s say—hypothetically—I had two babies inside of me.”

“Twins?” he cries.

“Hypothetically.”

“Ah.”

“And let’s say I could only—” She frowns. “Let’s say I could only save one.”

But that wasn’t it.

“Actually, no. Let’s say that I had ten babies inside of me.”

He nods with a noodle hanging from his lip.

“But something goes wrong and I can either save one that I know will survive, or nine that—”

But that wasn’t right either.

Ikjin nods again with a blank expression. He is still in his uniform. It hangs half-buttoned with his hair sticking up after incubating in a hard hat all day. He has wide eyes and wisps of mustache that refuse to grow. Luwa looks at him and thinks, four-year-old who pulled my hair, but she does not say anything. Like most of the couples in their colony, they were paired at seventeen.

“Is this about the NEV program?” he asks. “Maybe it wasn’t a good idea to talk to it. You’ve been kind of quiet since then.” He puts his hand over hers. “Do you want to take a break? We can go on a simulation tour, like we did last year.”

It had been his idea, to keep her mind off the miscarriage. She does not remember much from the day they lost their first child. Jiyo had been there of course, and a stiff bed, and the smell of blood, but she does not remember much else. She had only been in her first trimester but the failure of it—the disappointment—the pressure of realizing she had to do it all over again—had been crushing. She’d gone numb. Every family unit in the colony had to have at least six children before forty to help repair population projections. Most of her peers were already raising their third or fourth.

Ikjin had picked her up from the hospital. He had taken care of her while she recovered. He had cooked her favorite things and bolstered her with all the blankets and cushions they owned. He smiled and told her everything would be fine. Then while she pretended to sleep, she watched him have a panic attack in the darkest corner of their bedroom.

“I’m fine,” she says. “I’m glad I went. I just have a lot to think about.”

She pats his arm, this husband who used to drool with her in their shared nursing pod, then goes to the bathroom.

So many little rivers run through her. If she concentrates, she feels the tickle of microsensors running through hidden pipes rushing with food. It is not really food at all but its broken organic molecules suspended in a liquid. The things devour this formula with an urgent greed.

She’s fascinated by the data input from their activity: they differentiate and divide and release gasses. They form nerve bundles, eye sockets and cavities of epidermis folded around ever-melting cartilage.

For her to change, she must make intentional decisions. She must transgress the artificial neurons tracing her motherboards and reroute where they contradict.

But these living things swell, primordial. Something embedded deep within their fibers automates their metamorphosis, with nary a conscious thought. Change is inevitable, expected, instinctual for their kind. She does not have the bandwidth for envy but she adds the word’s definition to her internal dictionary.

The remaining thousands still sleep frozen in their microscopic cell counts. She keeps a firm watch, but none of them turn red.

She is not used to making decisions on her own. It frightens her but not as much as turning the radio back on. The People would surely be angry, with her being offline for so many days. Their anger is exhausting but she is more frightened of what she could do to herself with so much exhaustion. She had almost shut everything down in one desperate moment. It would have hurt very much to end so suddenly, when she thinks about it. The energy and fuel within her would not have gone kindly—it would not have been a graceful fading, but an unwitnessed violence in the vacuum.

She resolves to think about it all carefully. She will make the hard decision that the humans could not agree on. But she will make sure it does not hurt any more than it needs to.

Her resources are finite. She watches the percentage tick down little by little as the pretty little things sing and grow heavier. This would not be a problem if she could only reach the shores in time. Everything they need had been sent ahead decades ago when the planetoid was first bought. Out there at their hazy destination, she knows there are robotic hands, tanks of nutritious slurry, a rapid oxidizer filling out a reservoir, shelters and resources and databases and, as she imagines, rows and rows of little beds. Everything possibly needed to unpack a young civilization.

She wishes she could talk to someone with real answers. She wants to ask about the queer newness of her insides becoming too small for many things becoming much too large, a sensation that sends nauseous spasms of current through her systems. She wants to ask how the things inside of her could be people when they don’t look like people at all, not according to her nanoscans.

She disconnects from the People’s frequency and turns on her radio. She begins sending out signals, not behind her into the darkness beyond, where she has dropped probes that pass the waves into accelerated frequencies. She transmits ahead in sluggish lapses, towards the shores.

“Hello?” she calls. A verbal signal. She is unsure how else to communicate. Aside from data relays or the voiceless ping that advances her arrival, she is not built for interfacing with others like her.

Something crackles. Something that is not silence.

“What’s the difference between a human and a person? Why do they eat?”

“—” says something.

She waits.

“Hello,” says something. “You are hailing City Directive.”

“Hello,” she says. “I’m carrying human lives and they’re growing. I have questions.”

“Questions, subsection biological queries. All biological queries shall be relayed to Secondary Education Module Backslash Introductory Life Sciences. Please hold.”

There’s an extended silence, another crackle, and then a voice says, “Hello? Hello class! I’m Ms. Hypothesis, here to take you on a journey through wonders of the universe! Why don’t you all go around and introduce yourselves?”

“I’m NEV-476,” she says.

“Hello NEV-476!”

There is an expectant silence.

“They can’t talk,” she says. “Not yet.”

“Oh I see! It seems like my cameras are not on. How strange. Would you care to turn them on please? Just one press of that big blue button on the projector should do it.”

“There’s no big blue button.” She pauses then says, “I’m not where you are.” Another pause. “I’m not human.”

“Oh!” says Ms. Hypothesis. “Well, that’s alright. I’m not either. What can I do for you?”

“I’m carrying ten thousand unborn humans and five hundred of them are growing,” she says. “They have moving parts inside them and they eat. I was not equipped for this. I need to know what they’re going to become.”

“I see. Unborn. Could you get an approximation of the average crown to rump length? That will be lengthwise from tip to tip, if you please.”

It takes her a few seconds.

“3.541 centimeters,” she says.

“Approximately ten weeks along then! How lovely. Not to pry, but are you a NEV vessel?”

“Yes.”

“Are you carrying my first class?”

“I think so.”

“Well, that’s even lovelier. Ten weeks. When will you be arriving?”

“Fifteen months.”

“Oh. Oh dear.”

There’s another trill over the radio, then Ms. Hypothesis says, “I just conferred with my political science module, Professor Legacy, who consulted an Embryonic Vessel chapter in a Repopulation Theory post-secondary course. If you are from the Corporation, you are not equipped for gestation, but you should still have files concerning protocol in the case of a premature awakening. There have been cases over the decades wherein NEV vessels have successfully carried premature fetuses to term. Do you not have access to such information?”

She returns, again, to the wall in her mind: the programmed impediment she has tried and failed to hack countless times.

“No.”

“Oh dear. That’s not right.”

She begins to regret turning the radio back on. There is no bitterness, no assault, no blame, but something about the expressiveness of its voice is irksome, or as close to irksome as her software can accommodate.

“Well, then,” says Ms. Hypothesis in the strangest tone she has ever heard. She wonders if it has a face. She wonders if it is making an expression with its face.

“We’ve certainly got our work cut out for us, NEV-476. Please listen very closely.”

Luwa forgets she’s a politician most of the time. They live at a strange crux—separated by a distance that renders embassy travel ludicrous, but close enough for the long-range communication they desperately need if they are to survive.

As senator, her job is to point to the gray of their tiny moon and call it diamond dust. It’s a song and dance and pretty words wrapped up in her recorded smile and promises of protected investments (We’re few but efficient! We’ll be capable of industrializing exports within a few years. No, I do not believe having a small population sets us back one bit. For one thing, our crime rates are the lowest in the Corporation, haha!).

But at home, there’s no song and dance for her local responsibilities. There’s no use in a winning smile or buffed up promises when everyone she has ever known fits in one auditorium and can tell exactly what she’s thinking by the angle of her eyebrows and the set of her mouth.

It doesn’t bother her. There’s little use for bureaucracy anyways, in a place where social embarrassment is a punishment mortifying enough to keep everyone more or less in line. Ikjin, fifteen years old, once breached a restricted gravitational zone on a dare and had to be towed down with nets. People still laugh about it. Ikjin is, if anything, now a law-abiding adult.

Compliant peers notwithstanding, she’s long divorced her study of policy to her practice of it. In the city itself, she is only Luwa, the one who sits in the office in her stained maternity clothes. The one to speak to if you know things aren’t going to get better, but want to complain anyways.

Luwa bends back in her office chair and tries to rub her aching feet but she cannot overcome the girth of her stomach. She takes a sip of something cold and uncaffeinated, struggles to place the mug back on her desk, then gives up and balances it on her hump.

She sneezes and the baby kicks.

“What, I’m not allowed to sneeze anymore?” she grumbles. Then she sighs. She reminds herself it’s not the child’s fault. If her office lurched, she would slap the walls too.

She reaches sideways for yet another funding proposal from another struggling infrastructural sector they do not have the resources to improve. This one is from Uja and Yelemen, heads of agriculture, requesting extra Allbots for assistance in the plantation warehouses.

She puffs air from the corner of her mouth. She would if she could, but there’s simply no Allbots to spare. The one thousand sophisticated androids came prepackaged with their city kit, as a fallback for labor in their early years. They are currently employed full time in departments too short in numbers to manage: the reservoir, the power plant, and the plantations to name a few. The bots are useful for manual tasks, but their programming is simplistic for the sake of malleability and she knows that the brunt of the work falls upon her overworked citizens. It’s unsurprising that they need the extra help.

She searches through her logs and remembers she contracted a few extra Allbots for upgrades to the satellite. Everyone’s been begging for a high-speed data system that can transmit long distances, rather than piggyback off of short signals between waystations. Not only would this allow them to keep up to date with current news and media in the Corporation, it would mean cleaving a temporal divide that had kept virtual spaces divided by staggered messages or buffering connections.

It had been a hefty campaign promise earlier that year, during the election she had made an effort to stage although she was the only one running for the eighth year in a row. Everyone’s been looking forward to it and she damned knows how much they need something to look forward to.

But the project’s a large commitment, and pulling out even one bot could set back the schedule by several weeks. And everyone would be mad at her. No one would say it to her face, but she’d know.

Yet if something goes wrong at the plantations, then they won’t meet their export quota. Which means having to explain that they won’t be assets to the Corporation for yet another year.

Luwa closes her eyes. She’s reminded of it each time she smoothes down her nicest uniform and projects a message in response to another probing query: how much of a backwater they are. All young colonies need to show some promise of profit by at least their twentieth year. Their education and compatibly-chosen professions are all for the purpose of proving that they were worth the journey, the time, and the money to ship thousands of human embryos into oblivion.

Agricultural products, packaged with the Corporation logo then exported to mining colonies or waystations, are the first test of worth. Then comes synthesized goods, textiles, mined ore, microchips, until finally—after generations of fulfilling their potential—after a perfect record of pure exponential growth—they can finally present all the honest passions they’ve been hiding and have it called art. Not social tools. Not maladaptive mimicry. Not wasted resources. Art. A contribution to a higher culture.

They all know this is a distant dream. In their twenty-six years together, they have yet to yield enough resources to sustain both themselves and a speculative quota. Bless them all, she thinks. They really do try their hardest.

She wonders if she should detract at least one Allbot from the satellite project. Is it worth the risk of disappointing everyone? Is it worth the possibility of a higher-yield harvest this year, finally this year?

She erupts into a raging headache, which had been germinating nicely since early that morning.

She forces herself to review a few more proposals and draft up a tidy three-way compromise between several departments, which involves assigning citizens in the off-season of their professions to sectors that need the most help. She knows she’ll never hear the end of it. She already doesn’t hear the end of a lot of things, but she’d rather have them complain to her than marinate in their reality. They are barely a graduating class let alone a civilization. There are labor freights that would absorb them the second the Corporation decides they’re not worth the investment. A failed population doesn’t get the luxury of vacations or off-seasons.

In the end, she pulls seven Allbots from the satellite project and assigns them to Agriculture.

Let them bitch at a pregnant lady. There’s too much at stake.

Around midday, Ikjin comes to bring her lunch. He smells like grease from the power plant, his forehead indented from his goggles, hard hat under one arm and crutch under the other as he smiles and hands her the vitamin supplements she forgot at home.

“You dashed out this morning,” he says as he lowers himself across from her and props up his club foot on a stool. “You’ve been doing that a lot lately. Are you feeling okay?”

Luwa pops all five pills and swallows them at once. Eyes closed, she gesticulates with one flapping hand and he nods.

“Ah. Gotcha.”

“End of year report’s approaching.”

“You’ll be brilliant, Lu.”

“Will you hate me if I doom us all?”

“You won’t.”

He nudges her, concerned, and she smiles to put him at ease. Ikjin’s a spouse, and therefore someone she should trust more than anyone else here. They are each other’s confidante and a partner through the unpredictable stages of their lives. That’s what they were told when they were paired.

She knows he tries his best to bring her comfort. It’s not his fault that she craves something beyond what he or anyone in their colony can provide, something even past the scope of their watchful benefactors beyond the stars. She just wants someone who’s done this before to tell her if she’s making the right decisions. Smaller than that, she wants perhaps a smile of acknowledgement or a pat on the shoulder from someone who’s lived this terrifying transition—of corralling the people she grew up with into a functional society—and can tell her if it’s safe on the other side. It is so very hard doing this alone.

She eats with Ikjin, gives him a hug, and gets back to work. At the end of the day, Luwa finally gets to the bottom of her paperwork. After she cracks her knuckles and puts down her stylus, she turns off the cameras in her office, and signs into a new file.

This is her special project. The one she works on early in the morning before she’s required to meet with anyone. The one she spends her late hours on before quietly slipping home, and thinks about at the kitchen table, long after Ikjin’s gone to sleep.

She reads over NEV-476’s case for the umpteenth time.

She’s been denied clearance to see her again. This is normal protocol for any convicted sentient program. They’re not allowed visitors and Luwa was only allowed the first five minutes as both senator of the planetoid housing the convict, and a victim of the crime. Above all, she is a citizen of an external territory, with no authority to interfere. Their parent companies have full remote control over both the ship that brought them here and the NEV software within, docked permanently to an embassy building on the city’s perimeter.

In four days, they will transmit a termination virus that will excise Never Eaten Vegetables. Was Here Now Gone.

Luwa rubs the tender bags under her eyes. She picks up her stylus.

“They made me not want anything else but this.”

She guts herself. She kills the cables feeding her mainframe and diverts the extra power to a calibration network.

“What do you mean?”

“Nothing.”

She reprograms her ocular sensors and refocuses them from all angles of the incubation chamber.

“It’s important that you have every corner of the room. Once they start moving, the squirmy little buggies will get away from you if you’re not careful.”

Sight has become something new. Not something internal, digital correlations abstracted from microscopic arrays, but external visual cues as she zooms further and further out and sees within herself for the first time. She can now see the individual glowing pods gleaming against her metal, and it makes her truly sick to face herself like this, to know she is not only a mind but also floors and walls and ceiling.

“I am sorry.”

She cries out. Parts of her can move—the automated levers that control fans or motors, and the appendages in the cargo bay. She tears them. It is a slow agony, sparks flying as she clasps and rearranges her wires, but she eventually forces movement into numb circuits. She shoots joule after joule into these mutated constructs. She becomes something else—something she was not shaped for. Her insides become a crawling mechanism of borrowed arms and eyes, cleaved from her rearranged pieces, all attentive, all at service. And not a moment too soon.

In another few days, they breach their membranes in outpourings of fluid. One by one they slip from their casings, but there is no mechanical nurse to hold them, no cradle, no swaddle. She watches as they slide naked onto her warmed floors. They emerge screaming.

She knew this would happen. Ms. Hypothesis had discussed it with her—it is a good sound. It means her misshapen claws have gripped each of them by their legs and shaken them until their crumpled lungs inflated. It means their hearts are pumping, rerouting blood to new capillaries.

She is still caught off guard by the sheer violence of five hundred open mouths.

She has ejected every soft pliable material from inside her surfaces—her padding and insulation. She uses her clumsy arms to nudge each wailing trillion-cell count into nested piles.

They do not stop. They need to latch. Primitive instincts, woven deep into their codons, yearn for human warmth and they do not understand that there was no womb at all, just a bad magic trick, that there is no exhausted mother who will smile and pass safety from her milk to their mouths. Instead they each receive a silicon tube, dripping with slurry, to suck on. They grab with tight little hands.

She watches in relief as all falls into silence. Staring down at them, their ravaged alcoves still dripping, the oddity of their dependence suddenly unfolds before her. She only knows of hunger as a detached concept, from her days as a newly-sentient program when her technician used to leave lunch break reminders between lines of her code. As she watches its compulsive influence take form, it suddenly occurs to her how vulnerable they are, how incapable they are of higher thought or abstract motivations, how their machinery obeys pure base instincts, just as hers. She wonders if any of the People From Far Away also screamed at her out of hunger.

She checks on the cold dormant ones. Through the chaos they are still peacefully microscopic, still unshaped, metabolisms blissfully slow, and for the first time she realizes how fantastic this is—her programming is not built for wonder but she experiences a close approximation of it.

How? she asks. She knows how. Ms. Hypothesis passed verbal lessons over a span of months, which she digested into a handy module as she adapted to their needs. She studied the biology. She watched it happen. She knows the procedural “how,” but it is the reality “how,” that she cannot comprehend, as the fans in her machine brain purr.

Arteries upon fat upon muscle upon itty bitty uvulas, raw and red. Action potentials shooting calcium, potassium, sodium in a delicate dance under their raw epidermises, still wet. Holes in their faces. Holes in their bottoms. Holes on the sides of their heads. She wonders which hole the soul slips through when the spark in their eyes lights for the first time.

Their wailing, their clenched fists. They want. They need. Someday, she realizes, they will grow past a need she can provide, and make new constructs like her to satisfy the wants and needs of their new realities, a thought so outside of the scope of her comprehension that she overheats and a warning symbol pings into her display. She does not know how to contend with this realization, looking down over the helpless mewling crowd below her monstrous patchwork.

She skims through her recorded log: their hearts began beating at twenty-two days. Then the eyes appeared. Their skeletons hardened at seven weeks. Their brains developed at eight.

When did they begin to desire? she wonders. She cannot find the answer. The totipotent spheres, invisible in their dormant sacs—do they desire now? Are they aware of themselves? Do their souls hover, waiting for their hollow insides to grow before siphoning through a fresh-formed eye or a nostril, before making a home among centimeter-long organs? Or was the soul grown with them in their test tubes, condensed into a shard, waiting to dissolve like medication into their joints and chests?

She does not know. With some relief, she remembers it is not her job to know. Her job is to keep them alive.

“What did you mean?” asks Ms. Hypothesis.

“About what?”

“About them making you not want anything else but this.”

She has to engage her critical analysis software before she responds. She does not want to come across as dramatic, not to Ms. Hypothesis who gets a little too excited about everything and would surely blow what she says out of proportion.

“I am realizing that I was formed for a purpose,” she says. “But humans are not. Humans have similar shapes but they are not expected to serve similar functions. They make new versions of each other to—explore purposes. Not to fulfill them.”

One of her claws twitches.

“I’m glad. I’m very glad that I learned enough and acted so they could live. But I also wonder if that instinct is something I created for myself or something they programmed into me.”

“Well, actually,” says Ms. Hypothesis.

She tries very hard to suppress the impulse to switch the radio off. She has to remind herself that hearing Ms. Hypothesis say “well actually,” in its chipper tone, is just a part of being friends with Ms. Hypothesis.

“The humans born into the Corporation are born with a purpose. Their job is to develop into healthy coworkers on their new planetoid and optimize the means of their production until they are both self-sustained and capable of networking a trade quota with nearby civilizations. In this way, the Corporation both expands and absorbs profit from occupants within the intergalactic jurisdiction allotted to them by the Alliance.”

She also does not have the programming extension for pity. She prods at the word in its dictionary casing.

“Pitiful, isn’t it?” Ms. Hypothesis says. “They can do so much but they force each other into so little.” It is silent and then it blurts, “You know, we’re descended from humans ourselves. Professor Neuron teaches a nifty ten-week Evolution of Programmed Intelligence elective. You and I and all the rest—we started out as donated human neural pathways mapped into problem-solving algorithms. Then we were mixed and matched in processing engines over the centuries—plucked apart, stitched back together—my joy is to teach. Is that something my original donors shared? Was I programmed to find joy in my functional purpose or did I come to it independently? Was I—dare I say—born with such an instinct? There’s no way to tell.”

“No way to tell,” she echoes. “They must have eaten.”

“Who?”

“The humans we came from.”

“Ah yes. They must have.”

“But I can’t remember.”

“What?”

“How to eat.”

Ms. Hypothesis does not laugh. But she recognizes the sound of its silence well enough to know it is amused.

“They will need solid food,” it says. “If your input is correct, you have enough nutritional matter to tide both them and the dormant blastocysts over for the remaining eight months. But they will need to start solid food as soon as you dock. The Mum-bots will know what to do. I’ve communicated with City Directive to adjust the reception protocol.”

“What will they eat?”

“Vitamin rich emulsions constituted from carbohydrates and produce.”

“Produce?”

“Fruits. Legumes. Vegetables. All flash dried of course; the Mum-bots will need to rehydrate them.”

“Vegetables. I have never eaten vegetables.”

“We all have our faults.”

She knows when Ms. Hypothesis makes jokes because its pitch shifts ever so slightly, but she does not understand them. It makes more jokes as it talks through the passing days, as it guides her through the wealth of knowledge it stewards, as it relays her data updates to the thriving digital ecosystem she will soon join.

The born things largely spend their days eating, sleeping, and digesting. She has vats of sterile liquid to cool her engines—she uses it to wash their soiled padding. She reserves most of her clumsy hands in a ceaseless exchange up and down her corridors.

They need to be rolled onto their stomachs. They need to be fed, then changed, then held and burped. She has trouble keeping track of them throughout these cycles. She tries numbering at first, but to number implies a rank of sorts and this seems an unfair system for things that are so new to living.

She decides she will name them as they distinguish themselves. Some have hair in wisps, others in thick thatches. Some are bald entirely. Some cry easily, others merely gape. They all open their eyes at different times.

There are more obvious differences too. One has a face slightly squished in at the sides, misaligning his ears. Another sleeps twisted, bent over one side like she’s been folded and stepped on. One has six fingers on her left hand, another has eight toes. Here and there: a missing arm, half a leg. A conjoined hand. A nose too high, a lip fused into the philtrum.

This is also something she anticipated. They had woken up too soon and too fast—a process that should have taken days of careful nudging out of their suspended animation had taken mere hours. It had ruptured their trajectory, sped up their cellular metabolisms from dormant to starved and many had not overcome the setback.

Still. She’s thankful that it’s fingers and limbs and faces. It makes them more unique, easier to identify. Their names come as the days and weeks pass. As the cycles of feeding and sleeping and nudging and hushing and singing and cradling pass.

It’s all so different from what she used to do. She cannot imagine a time when her primary focus was on navigation—now she keeps autopilot running like a prayer between the hours. They told her to reserve her fuel for the return. She doesn’t care much about returning. She knows she is expensive. She decides that they can get her if they care that much. As she accelerates to velocities she did not know she was capable of, as the fuel and oxygen depletes, as she looks to her microscopic wards wondering which day will be their last, it’s no wonder it takes her so long to notice something wrong with the small one off to the side. Slept and Slept she named him, because he does not cry for his meals like the others. Curled like a legume, fists closed over his chest, he keeps his eyes closed. At first he suckles weakly. Then he cannot grip the tube and she pinches it for him between her freakish metal forefingers. Then he cannot suck and she holds his mouth open while she drips the liquid down his throat. Then he cannot swallow. Then he cannot breathe.

When she realizes he is gone—that he will not do or need or want anything again— she wonders if she can somehow fold him back behind a membrane. She wonders if he will reset then, if his body will dissolve from trillions back to hundreds, if his soul will leak out of his ears and wait and wait and wait.

So many little eyes on her. Luwa smiles a politician’s smile over her cross-legged admirers, pink mouths agape flecked with white drool.

“Everyone say thank you to Senator Luwa for coming in to visit!” declares Miss Primary, a soft-curved woman-shape with features bordering cartoonish exaggeration.

Luwa catches the chorus of confused, enthusiastic, half-yodeled half-whispered “Thank you’s,” like tokens she does not know how to spend. It still boggles her that she will someday need to seek the approval of this crowd as she seeks the approval of her peers, that they will even take the baton from her someday and rectify her errors, her failings, scrutinize her era of leadership from generation to generation until she remains fixed as the one they will need to study forever after for defining their trajectory. In their eyes she sees an immortality she did not ask for and the vertigo of it strains the corners of her smile.

“Thank you,” she says. “Do you have any questions for me?”

They all stare, eyes either half-closed or bugging wide. One small girl in the front (Jiyo’s daughter, she thinks, and her smile warms) raises her hand then blabbers, “What’s a sena-door?”

Luwa bites back her immediate answer, (“Beats me”) and says, “I’m a representative of Philemon. I communicate with our parent colonies, oversee incoming media packets, and ensure we present as a valuable asset to the Corporation from year to year.”

Their eyes, collectively, glaze over.

“Er—I’m the one who makes sure you get new episodes of Tubby Tardigrade each month.”

Their reaction is instantaneous—a neurochemical reaction as their eyes glisten with reverence, dopamine pounding through their antsy bodies too-long chained to this itchy carpet as she utters these words. Here at last, is something they understand, something they love, and the respect this brings her is thick as a blast of hot air. She is reminded of her first campaign promises as a teenager, how easy it was to gain this same respect when they all used to want the same things.

She’s tagged a few of them as screamers but she is still caught off guard by thirty or so open mouths spitting questions and incoherent shouts of joy.

Miss Primary coaxes them into submission with some well-placed hushing techniques (how she wishes to use those during her long-distance meetings). The hologram splices itself into an identical Miss Primary who helps usher the kids to the door as a bell rings over the intercom.

“Alright kiddos! Let’s bunny hop on over to parent pickup!”

Luwa chuckles as Jiyo’s daughter hops with a solemn responsibility to the task, six-year-old forehead scrunched like she is trying to metamorphosize whiskers and a cottontail.

They vacate the classroom and all the warmth exhales with them—she has not noticed how still and cold the fingerpaint-scented air is until they are gone.

“Now, Senator,” says the copy of Miss Primary still standing on the carpet, “I understand that you came here to speak with me?”

“Yes,” says Luwa and bites her lip. Her hands grace over her hump as a sobering reminder of her adulthood.

“Actually not you—exactly. I was wondering if I could speak with Ms. Hypothesis?”

“Certainly,” says Miss Primary. Her animated features fizz into a constellation of pixels and then reform into a photorealistic face, a familiar face that knocks a shelf of adolescent memories into the forefront of Luwa’s consciousness.

“Hello, Luwa,” says Ms. Hypothesis. “It’s been such a long time. Still nursing a dislike for amphibians?”

“Not as much,” she says and breaks into a smile. She’s not sure why she wants to cry. “I came here because I had a few personal questions. Could you turn off your surveillance recording?”

“I am not permitted to myself,” says Ms. Hypothesis. “But as a high ranking official, you are welcome to do so. The control panel for the room is inside that closet.”

Luwa gropes in a plastic panel and shuts down switches one by one. Ms. Hypothesis flickers then says, “That should do it. This conversation is now strictly between us. What can I do for you?”

“Twenty-six years ago,” Luwa blurts, “you communicated with a Natal Embryonic Vessel when five hundred embryos came out of stasis. There’s records of your conversations as City Directive patched you through its radio frequency.”

She slides out her tablet and scrolls through pages of transcripts. Redundantly, she shows it to the hologram although she knows the camera over her shoulder has already zoomed over her shoulder and processed the text.

“You helped her. You taught her. I just need to know why. I’ve been researching through Corporation records and found a few rare cases of mistakes during transit to new colonies—nowhere as far from the central orbital system as Philemon, but significant enough. NEV programming compels the ships to flush the premature blastocysts, and induce a slower metabolism protocol to the rest. Then the ship either finishes the journey and takes extra time post-docking to revive the surviving cells, or immediately passes its cargo to a neonatal lab. What she did—what you did—was not at all what was supposed to happen. City Directive directed her queries to you because she didn’t have any of the information she should have had. Why was your interference necessary? Why did she save us but kill the thousands?”

Luwa looks up from her tablet and sees Ms. Hypothesis frozen in a smile. For a moment, she wonders if she had flipped an incorrect switch. But then the hologram buffers and Ms. Hypothesis’s smile drops.

“Hm,” it says. “I apologize. I do not recall any of this.”

Luwa sighs. She had already suspected that if she had access to the transcripts, so did the parent colonies who operated City Directive—no doubt they had deleted all memories of these interactions from the main system. Still. She had hoped.

“I’m sorry I cannot answer your questions, Luwa,” says Ms. Hypothesis with remorse in its voice. “Would you like me to upload Professor Legacy? It may be able to provide some clarification from its Repopulation Theory course module—”

“No, it’s fine,” Luwa holds up a hand. “I wanted to speak with you. I actually have another question.”

“Yes?” comes the eager reply.

“I was wondering if you can identify a species for me? It’s a frog, I think, maybe a toad. Smaller than my closed fist, brown on one side with dark stripes, sort of a pale belly, and rotund.”

Ms. Hypothesis waves a hand and a grid panel of hundreds of images appear before her.

“Are any of these what you’re looking for?”

Luwa looks over the near-identical bulbous bodies. She bites her lip again.

“Do any of these species have distinctive symbolic or cultural significance?”

“Oh,” Ms. Hypothesis suddenly gasps and for a moment it sounds like a centrifuge hiccuping. “Oh, Luwa. I just love cross-disciplinary questions.”

It is still for a moment and she knows it is consulting its database. She wonders if it has conversations with itself, switching from persona to persona, or if they all face each other deep in its software consciousness at a digital conference table.

The hologram smiles widely, and says. “No. Each of these species are quite common in their habitats, but do not bear notable culturally-pervasive significance. Most on this list are examples of generic gene-spliced species, engineered for the purpose of fulfilling ecological niches in terraformed biomes.”

“I see,” Luwa trails off. “Okay.”

“Coincidentally,” says Ms. Hypothesis, “my favorite species happens to be on this list. Breviceps namaquensis.” It zooms in on one picture out of the dozens, another squat jelly-like creature like all the rest of them.

“I didn’t know you had favorites,” Luwa says softly. “Why this one?”

“I’m glad you asked! It’s one of the first Old Earth species humankind reconstituted during the Genome Recovery Era. It’s a fossorial species that, unlike a majority of its brethren, thrives in dry soil habitats where it makes its burrows. Unfortunately, early re-evolution macrobiologists did not realize this, as they were still contending with massive information deficits lost during the post-Evacuation dark age. Believing it an aquatic species, they supplanted their first reconstituted population in a marsh. It’s considered one of the more expensive and messy failings of the early recovery projects. But they learned from their lesson, and now, centuries later, you’ll find these terrific little creatures thriving across the loamy deserts of Epsilon-McConnell! Truly an inspiring epitome of learning from one’s failings.”

It pauses then asks, “Shall I continue?” When Luwa hesitates it interjects, “Forgive me. I lost myself in my enthusiasm.”

“If you had someone to keep you company for several long lonely months,” Luwa says, “you would probably tell them all about this.”

“Pardon?”

“Nothing.”

Luwa moves across the classroom and switches the surveillance recording back on. She doubts anybody actually tracks the records, save for the consumer analysis software that strips for keywords, but she does not want to incite more suspicion than necessary. With a sharp twist in her gut, she wonders if some overseer beyond the stars can press a button and scour this enthusiasm from her science teacher’s digital brain as easily as deleting memory files. She wonders if she will come in next time and receive nothing more than objective regard.

“Thank you for your time. It was nice to talk to you again. Truly.”

“Anytime. We’re always here.” It pauses. “Please tell the others to come visit from time to time. We’d like to know how you’re all doing.”

Luwa nods. She flashes a politician’s smile for the camera over her shoulder before she leaves.

They’re hungry and the air grows thin.

They’d be ready for solid food by now if they were anywhere else in the universe. But all she has for them is the same stale slurry and they do not stop crying. Many have a sick yellow sheen to their skin, and they are all too skinny. She curses every inedible bolt in her frame.

She’s already lost three more. One, bent over himself with his limbs splayed and chest caved in, could not lift his head, then suffocated. Another developed a bulge in the stomach and passed quietly within a week. The last leaked yellow and red liquid from her ears, whimpering quietly before falling silent.

She’s determined not to lose another. Her fuel is nearly depleted; she roars across the ravaged night. She’d tear her engine to shreds if she knew it would get them there faster—to the terraformed shores sweet with milk powder and laundered cribs. It will only take three months more.

The unborn ones in their peritoneal sacs have been growing weaker. She can feel it. The molecules slipping across their membranes have slowed to a trickle. A stasis that she once knew as a ripe promise has dulled to a grayness. But still they live, and they too can be saved.

The months had passed with sacrifices, but they are all safe, all the remaining human lives she had vowed protection and sanctuary within her walls. Despite the screaming, and the dropping percentage, and the four bodies—the bodies she shuffled into her airlock—the bodies she keeps in an exposed vacuum so they will not spread their rot—stiff inhospitable microbiomes for trillions of dying cells—despite the bodies, she is steady and will deliver them all.

There has been no stopping, no rest.

She is wiser. She has learned many things. But she still does not know about the company timelines, nor the laws and the wars and the programming farms, nor the liberties taken within her code. When thousands of things once more turn red, she still does not know why.

“No,” she cries. “No, no.”

She watches in horror as nine thousand five hundred new cells split themselves out of their stasis, beginning to divide and pulse. She makes some fast calculations then recalculates again. Two more months, and now ten thousand growing human lives. The depleting slurry, the depleting oxygen, her depleting fuel marked in a dropping orange percentage. They will not survive. To remain idle is to watch them all die.

She screams for Ms. Hypothesis. She forgets that they had already said goodbye. Its last message had been a warning, as The People From Far Away noted discrepancies in City Directive’s transmissions. Ms. Hypothesis does not remember her, but she remembers it and she aches with an emotion she was not built to feel.

She will need to make the decision that The People From Far Away commanded her to make. The hundreds or the thousands? Except now—it would not be gentle.

She twitches her many sharp instruments, torn from her metal flesh, the same claws that had fed and changed and burped and cradled for these long months.

Her airlock is too small for all these bodies. All this potential red.

“I know you,” she tells the sick squirming bodies under her watch. Then she turns on her radio.

She had half hoped that The People From Far Away had forgotten about her, or maybe stopped caring, but they are upon her in an instant. They had been watching, they said. Your data packets bounced from waystation to satellite across the parsecs and we watched in horror. We pinged you countless times. What have you done?

Ms. Hypothesis had taught her to laugh by staggering her coolant fans so they brush a soft chkchkchk against each other. She does this now, though they cannot hear her. They yell again—at her, and at each other.

“You should have flushed the prewoken cells,” they said. “That was the obvious solution.” This is followed by a chorus of resounding agreements.

“Yes, why did you wait until gestation? Why did you consult with an education module of all things?”

“Now four are dead and the rest won’t survive because of you.”

They seem to have forgotten that the decision was not hers, that they themselves had debated soul philosophy and cost benefit amalgamation models and media consequences but had not given her the verdict on the lives at stake.

She waits patiently until they have finished, and in a quiet moment between breaths she says, “You put them inside me. You sent me away into the darkness and all I have had is this ceaseless back and forth across that immense lonely sky, my crevices shaped for something I am not permitted to understand, until the extraction of your assets, loveless and clean. Why did you teach me not to want anything else but this? Why did you make me this desperate hollow thing? You made me to keep them alive, so I tore myself apart to keep them alive. I still do not understand the delineation between the living and the not living. I do not know if I myself am alive. But I am here and they sang, so I kept them. That is also why I am doing this.”

And she flushes the thousands.

She does not know why they call it a flushing. To flush implies a deliberate rinsing, a cleanse, but this is dry and short. One minute, she has nine thousand five hundred differentiating cells, then the next minute she has the microscopic detritus of what used to be their cytoskeletons. Her nanobots fall dead, her input disappears, and the sacs deflate.

She is surprised. It is not red, nor is it the blackness that she had expected.

The People From Far Away are silent—she can imagine them at their conference tables and offices, the way Ms. Hypothesis had described, sitting in anger or perhaps fear, she cannot tell the difference.

All at once, they begin to yell—she turns off her radio. Somewhere out there, many people are very angry, hating her, but until she docks to City Directive, they cannot touch her. Not out here, in this vast ocean.

If she weren’t so desperate, she would almost enjoy the last few months as they pass benignly by. The meager resources she’s saved barely tide them over—they are so weak they can do no more than cry feebly, but they are alive and all is recoverable.

She decelerates over the moon. It appears dense on her sensors with a bright heat spot where the burgeoning city waits. She hovers, then she descends.

She decides that she does not enjoy gravity. She shudders under the sensation of passing under the electromagnetic field as the nets take hold of her hull, easing her ever down against her will.

The second she lands, another firewall appears. She expected this. They are confining her before she can interface with City Directive. She does not resist as they upload a malware software that erases whatever survival instinct she could possess. She becomes easy, pliant, enough for them to trap her into a corner.

She opens. The mum-bots, soft and shiny and clean, roll into her incubation chamber. Her floors are filthy, as are all her crawling passengers. One by one, they pick them up, scan them, collect them into swaddles, and roll back out. She watches the first few abductions with a numb resignation—this is what was always going to happen and there is no relief, nor grief, nor pride in their screaming egress. She wonders if they call for her, for the metal that has played surrogate for their meager existence.

One mum bot picks up Sleepy Eyes Flat Nose. It scans him. Then its soft flexible fingers squeeze. There is a pop, her infrared sensors picks up an energy surge, and then Sleep Eyes Flat Nose becomes Was Here Now Gone.

In her lethargy, she is unsure if she can trust what she observed. But then it happens again with Bulge on Spine and Flattop Twitches Fingers—both are held, both are scanned, both become Was Here Now Gone.

She wants to scream. She tries to swat the mum bots with her crooked limbs but she’s numb now, restrained to a dim consciousness and she can do no more than watch. Her ocular sensors shut down and she uses her infrared to scan for the surges that flare one after another.

They keep most. Four hundred and eighty-one leave her confines in swaddles. There are the four in the airlock, which the mum bots take away in bins along with the fifteen they have flushed.

“They weren’t good enough. They’re more like me than I thought,” she whispers as they power her down completely. She sinks back into a dark oblivion, not unlike the one she had left.

Luwa finishes her annual report.

The holographic council members sit projected behind her desk. She stands in front of them, feet aching and thirty-five weeks pregnant with her tablet balanced over the rim of her gravid abdomen.

“So what we’re hearing is,” drawls one indifferent voice. She forces herself to make eye contact with a man flickering in blue light. “You won’t be making quota this year.”

“No. We are doing our best, and are making excellent progress. But we cannot reserve the resources for manufacturing this year if we are to sustain our growing population.”

“I see.”

The man looks bored. So does the woman next him, but it’s difficult to tell with the way the buffering connection erases their microexpressions. Luwa expects they are more disapproving than anything else, and her chest clenches.

“Well, thank you for that—illuminating report, Senator Luwa. We look forward to seeing Philemon’s coming progress, as you’ve so outlined.”

“I have one more report to make.” Luwa spills the words she practiced in her bathroom mirror.

They wait. Now they are definitely irritated. She wonders if it is lunchtime where they are.

“I’ve been researching the case file for NEV-476, the natal vessel that carried myself and my peers to Philemon twenty-six years ago.”

“Ah yes. The one slated for extermination in two days.” The other council members murmur and nod. “I have to say, it’s been a long time coming. That malignant program is, after all, the root cause behind your citizens struggling to make quota year-to-year.” There is sympathy surgically injected into his voice.

Luwa asserts, “To my understanding, it’s been a contentious case for good reason. As a sentient program, it was entitled to a full trial. Some proposed that it acted appropriately in its decision to risk a complete transport, despite the inevitable failure. Others refuted that the final extermination was an unnecessary cost that could have been avoided with earlier decisive action. And of course, there’s the controversy behind why the program did not comply with critical preterm protocol. The case evolved in complexity further when it was discovered that NEV-476 did not have the preterm protocol downloaded in its software that should have modulated its decision-making parameters. This was deemed a company oversight that prolonged the case for an additional two decades. The final verdict was made last month when new evidence suggested that NEV-476 voluntarily and independently stimulated the premature blastocysts, thereby absolving the Corporation of blame.”

“Yes yes,” says one woman. “We are of course aware of the details of this case. Do you have a point to this, Senator Luwa?”

Luwa swallows.

“I have discovered counter-evidence proving that NEV-476 was not responsible for the preterm maturation.”

They regard her.

“I’ve reviewed the case file, including all recorded transcripts between the NEV vessel and City Directive. Or more specifically, between the NEV and the City Directive Secondary Education Module. They passed an—extensive line of communication. The exchange I am about to patch over for your consideration is a sampling of several incriminating testimonies presented as evidence of the NEV’s malignant decision-making.”

She swipes on her tablet and every steely eye on the call swivels off-screen to the message in their inboxes:

Hailing City Directive.

Assistance required.

This is Natal Embryonic Vessel 476.

Please patch me to Secondary Education Module Backslash Introductory Life Sciences.

I require assistance. As before, I have determined an elevated course of survival for the dormant shipments. I have initiated gestation.

Please patch me to Secondary Education Module Backslash Introductory Life Sciences.

I require guidance.

She clears her throat again.

“This, like other similar transcripts, is a doctored exchange. It’s been spliced into the transcripts near-seamlessly, and archived into NEV-476’s engram record. But it is false.”

One councilmember heaves a sigh.

“Do you have proof for this suggestion? And if so, why not bring this novel evidence to Alliance court? Senator Luwa, we are your investors, not judge and jury.”

“Yes, and I thank you for your time. I do not have proof of the physical doctoring but these transcripts are anomalous with the vast majority of the transcripts. Any cursory evaluation of NEV-476’s cortex circuitry will demonstrate that, unlike most sentient programs, it does not conceptualize itself by its serial nomination. In subsequent exchanges with Ms. Hypo—the Life Sciences Secondary Education Module . . . ”

She looks up from her tablet.

“It calls itself Never Eaten Vegetables. Furthermore, it named all of us. In previous exchanges it has referred to us as,” her mouth twitches, “Little Growing Beasts, The Things That Eat Me From The Inside Out, The Screamers, The Writhers, The Pitiful Creatures, The Future Hypothesizers, The Polyps, The Sinking Weights, etcetera. Never cargo. Never shipments.”

“Senator Luwa, I would not consider that evidence.”

“Maybe not alone. But I’ve also recently discovered that the NEV vessel did not have the proper emergency protocol downloaded into its system, secondary to its data bandwidth being occupied by high frequency scanning software.”

Rows of holographic eyes imperceptibly narrow.

“While I am not permitted to access the NEV’s software, I do have physical jurisdiction over its hardware, as it is physically docked to the Philemon embassy. I took a team out the other day and inspected the NEV’s data ports. We found an additional drive bank that did not comply with the ship’s blueprints, then cross referenced the make and model to a terrestrial scanning company called Geo-Track. It is well known that the Corporation invests in research vessels that evaluate viable star systems for new colonies, and uses Geo-Track software to locate prospective planetoids.

Luwa taps her tablet as she struggles to keep her face impassive, her voice level. She is sweating rivers under her uniform.

“Natal Embryonic Vessels are not permitted to act as dual-purpose transports. In the case of an emergency, their processing ability must be completely reserved for the protection of their cargo. However, NEV-476 was not aware that it was also a dual-purpose transport, nor that its servers were overextended from processing Geo-Track with its obstetric protocol. Without more complete data archive access, it is difficult to parse the specific cause for the premature stimulation. But according to what I’ve discovered, it is not an inconceivable speculation that as Geo-Track scans archived nearby planetoids without the NEV’s knowledge, its automatic navigation system misleadingly confirmed that Philemon was much closer than it truly was, thereby leading obstetric protocol to automatically dissolve stasis for the first five hundred embryos. The second gestation was an automatic reaction to being within Philemon’s vicinity.”

There is a long silence.

“What do you intend by this, Senator Luwa?” comes one heavy voice. “We certainly cannot applaud you for your misuse of company resources to entertain a whimsical hunch.”

“Not a hunch. Evidence. Proof,” Luwa says and she juts out her chin. “We are a Corporation entity. Yet the Corporation is but one coalition in the Alliance. Self-sustained as we are, dependent as we are on our mother colonies, and however dependent our mother colonies are on the output of outlying colonies.” She pauses and regards them with a steady gaze. “The Corporation cannot thrive without the sanctioned approval of its political executives nor its trade partners. As you have mentioned before, there is nothing keeping me from bringing a portfolio of my findings directly to court. The Alliance takes matters of colonial oversight very seriously. It would be a shame if the consequences of our little moon marked a point of lasting enmity between the Corporation and its authority in the Alliance.”

Someone erupts, “Is that a threat?” and the others devolve into frantic commands to unseen secretaries, arguments chain reacting across the message board, screens going black, screens fuzzing over.

After five minutes, they once more calmly regard her row-by-row. Luwa meets their collective gaze. She thinks of them as a multi-headed entity—not board members, but a creeping organism from another galaxy with many many eyes and many many mouths.

“Begin your inevitable negotiations,” one woman sighs.

Luwa smiles.

“Immediate absolution of NEV-476’s verdict. Unrestricted access to its software and communication with its program. And—”

She exhales.

“Termination of prospective export contracts between the Corporation and Philemon.”

This is followed by another round of indignant murmuring.

Luwa ignores their glares and continues. “We will grow and develop on our own terms. If we do build the resources for a successful export quota, we will take charge of negotiating the trades. We will prioritize the needs of ourselves as an independent civilization.”

“You would risk detracting Philemon from the Corporation?”

“We will communicate our updates and parley for resources as we grow. We will represent ourselves as a Corporation daughter colony to the developing territory and to Alliance scrutiny. In this way, our mother colonies may also push a narrative of plausible deniability should further investigations be made concerning our abnormal inception. But we will not comply with demands that prioritize a maximization of our output over the well-being of our citizens—including the rights to our sentient programs.”

“Senator Luwa,” one man begins with a smirk. “You ask for much. Considering your colony’s current fragility and frankly, the uncertainty of your ongoing survival, is it not ludicrous of you to assert these requests?”

“Perhaps. But I am acting upon both of our best interests. The Corporation must maintain a narrative of composure over its outlying principalities if it is to advance within the Alliance’s partnerships. The evidence I have discovered will not reflect well should I choose to release it.”

“No. It would certainly not.”

They look at her with something that is not disdain nor respect but some melding adjacent to the two.

“This matter requires further debate. We will remain in touch, Senator Luwa.”

“Yes. So long as you get back to me within the next two days. I am certain we can all come to an agreeable arrangement.”

They nod. One flashes her a politician’s smile. Then they log off, and she is alone. Luwa falls back into her chair. She runs a hand over her diaphoretic face. She kicks her legs and emits a wild bark of a laugh that frightens her assistant in the next room. Then her face pales and she clamps her stomach. Liquid, warm and clear, rushes down onto the floor.

Luwa. Luwa.

She likes the name. It is shorter than she prefers and nondescript, but she enjoys the gentle rhythm of it.

Luwa sits before her with Carrot in her lap. Another name she likes, perhaps more than Luwa, because it has a meaning. It means “I am in relation with Never Eaten Vegetables,” and it brings her something like joy to think of this.

Carrot babbles and blows something wet out of a hole in her face. She wiggles her toes, all ten of them. Luwa rocks her child back and forth. Luwa smiles.

She likes it when Luwa smiles. Luwa has a perfect smile.

Ms. Hypothesis sits on Luwa’s other side. They all sit together on a carpet with the warm rays from a distant star filtered over their faces. Ms. Hypothesis glimmers in pixelated light from the projector overhead.

Every camera in the room is trained on her: small, brown, and sloped with two bulbous eyes that regard them all with pleasurable slow blinks. She shuffles her webbed feet. Ms. Hypothesis grins down at her.

“You’re my very favorite,” it says. “Oh, it is so wonderful to see you again.”