Issue 223 – April 2025

6220 words, short story

In My Country
by Thomas Ha

AUDIO VERSION

Winner: 2026 Locus Award for Best Short Story
Finalist: 2025 Nebula Award for Best Short Story
Finalist: 2026 Hugo Award for Best Short Story
Finalist: 2026 World Fantasy Award for Best Short Fiction

My country may seem strange to you.

There are times when it seems strange to me. I wake and work. I work then rest. And in between I say things, and I don’t say things. Because, as you’ll learn, in my country, what you say is important. But what you don’t say is perhaps just as, if not more, important.

Like all neighborhoods, mine has a blue house.

If you live here, yours too will have a house nearby that is blue. A man sits in the blue house, and he listens to the wind. And when he smiles at you, you smile at him. When he greets you, you, of course, will always greet him. When you come home and find him in your living room, you offer him tea. When you find him sitting in your bedroom, in the dark, you close your eyes and go to sleep, until he decides to leave. You listen, you wait, until he eventually leaves.

I once had a son and a daughter who asked about these things.

Like all neighborhoods with a blue house, there is, of course, a school. My son and daughter went to the school, before things quieted down. The schools are still around, but they are all much quieter now. Before the curricula were liberated, my son and daughter would ask me about the school. Where are the other children who were there before? Why are the teachers going to the far fields? Are we going to the far fields too?

I would point to the blue house, raise a finger to my lips, and smile.

One day, over dinner, my son asked: Who is the king?

What?

I did not mishear. My son asked, again, the same question. Who is the king? We read a story about a man who ruled another world, and it called him a king.

We’re a very special place, we have no king, I explained.

The man in the blue house, and the other men in the blue houses, they seem like kings.

I don’t think that’s true, I said. Why do they seem like kings?

Because a king is someone who does what they wish. And the men in blue houses do what they do, no matter what. We greet them and let them into our homes, no matter what.

Oh. Well, the men in blue houses only do what they do because of the local officials. And (anticipating his next question, I said) they only do what they do because of the district officials, provincial officials, and national officials. No single one of them has sole authority. Not any one person can do what they want to do. And so, you see, not one is a king.

What about the First Citizen?

Yes. I hesitated. In a way, the First Citizen might seem like a king. Here I waited again, looked at my son and daughter and listened to the wind. Behind the picture frames, and down the long hall in the full-body mirror, I detected the slight film of a static charge. I could see the eyes and the ears of men in blue houses within our walls. The First Citizen is something, I said, but he is no king.

There is no king.

Listen to what I say. Listen to what I don’t say.

My children nodded, and we did not speak about it for a time.

In your country, you might be afraid to talk about your king. In our country, we don’t have to be afraid because there is no king. In fact, people are welcome to criticize the First Citizen, who some mistake for a king. Many people take part in criticizing the First Citizen. They say he is ugly and stinks of shit. They say he cannot speak or understand or direct matters of importance.

Between the day-work ending bell and the night-work starting bell, we watch many men and women discuss the country and its officials on our televisions. They are free to say good things and bad things. So long as they pick one or the other. The important thing is to be sure to pick one or the other and talk to fill the time. When you fill the time with talk, there is little time for unproductive contemplation and other small ruins.

After a while, and lots of talk, my children grew.

My son became a writer at our university. There are many fine things about becoming a writer at a university like ours. My daughter was still in the neighborhood school, but she thought she might be a scientist or a teacher, she would have to see.

One day, over Sunday supper, my children said the usual prayers for their mother (who was no longer with us, like many mothers who were no longer with us after the closure of the state hospitals). But the children were unusually quiet, even for Sunday supper quiet. So I asked why both of them seemed so quiet.

Someone, a boy they knew from the neighborhood, a childhood friend, went to the far fields after a conversation with a man in the blue house.

Oh. Well, that is not the worst outcome, to go to the far fields after a conversation. People are sent there for a time to work in place of incarceration and other antiquated barbarities. But my son and daughter seemed not to agree. It was like they had seen and discussed things I had not seen or discussed with them. This was the first time I suspected they knew things I did not know.

It’s always the other thing, they said to me in reply.

What?

It’s always the other thing, when they say it’s the fields. Fields aren’t fields. Not when they say it that way.

What are they then?

My children listened to the wind, looked at the pictures, the mirror, and did not answer me. Their fingers flitted one way and the other with hand signals, back and forth to each other, something secret and silent communicated. I waited patiently and ate. I offered something of comfort:

At least the boy didn’t die, I said reassuringly. It’s incredibly rare, but sometimes these conversations take a turn, especially for those with certain sensitivities. I remember it happened to someone once, when I was young, someone with certain sensitivities died.

Death isn’t death, either. Not when they say it like that. This time, my son and daughter laughed, almost ruefully. When the men in the blue houses say someone has died, especially when they insist upon it, it means something else entirely, my children said.

My daughter used hand signals again. She pantomimed a small man, using her forefinger and middle finger as two legs. She showed him running off, running away, escaping. Then she held up her hands and stretched out her fingers, like claws.

You mean they got away and joined—

My son coughed.

Listen to what we say, he intoned. Listen to what we don’t say.

The children looked on, smugly, smiling, and I felt they were teasing me. They were, just a little. And that was fine by me. I had a laugh too. We finished the meal and retired to our rooms.

My son wrote.

He wrote and wrote and wrote. He wrote stories about many things, and I liked his stories. Many people liked his stories. They were strange and outlandish stories about strange and outlandish things. Other planets and other places. I think many of us liked reading about other planets and other places.

Then one day, he wrote a story that did not feel so outlandish. It was about a sickness. It was about a sickness that made chickens turn black and limp in their cages. It turned their feathers into flecks of dried skin and their eyes into weeping sores. When people ate the chickens, they would feel unwell, shut themselves in their homes, and never emerge.

Someone who worked with the chickens on the farm tried to warn his village, and other villages, against eating them. But someone with a long rope, someone called the Rope Man, paid the worker a visit before he could get very far or tell any of the others about the chickens. The story did not end. The story did not end, but it stopped abruptly, when the Rope Man paid the worker a visit.

It occurred to me that my son’s friend—the one who had been sent to the far fields—had worked in health inspection, but I did not say anything at the time.

The story would be trouble, I already understood, even then.

We have all kinds of art in this country. Triumphant art. Depressing art. Silly art. Pornographic art (subject to procreative code). You can do anything and everything, and some will support it or rail against it and talk about it in turn. There is only one kind of art you cannot make here. There is only one rule about what you cannot make here.

There can be no ambiguity to the art. It must be clear.

Everyone from the First Citizen down to each person in each neighborhood knew that stories had to be clear. Anything said had to be one thing or the other thing. Pick one thing or the other thing. So long as it was not an in-between thing. The in-between things were where problems lay.

My son knew, too, that he had flouted the law of clarity.

His stories grew increasingly odd.

One was about a machine operator. The operator worked a machine that directed bridges to raise and lower. But the machine stopped working properly. Something about the machine was beginning to break down, but the operator pretended it was not breaking down. Sometimes the bridge did not raise when it should, and boats crashed below. Sometimes the bridge went up when it shouldn’t have, and cars crashed above. Many times, no one was around or saw the machine fail, and nothing happened at all.

The machine operator did not tell anyone else in the city about the error. Everyone assumed it was caused by something other than the machines. Boat captains were blamed. Drivers were blamed. The operator assumed he would, too, be blamed and lose his job, or worse. Instead, the Rope Man appeared at his door and delivered a letter promoting him. The operator became the boss of all of the machine operators, each one with their own machines. And he soon learned, all of the other machines were equally flawed and never operated with any consistency either.

I don’t know if I like that story, I told my son.

That’s okay, he said. Liking or disliking it is not important. So that’s okay.

Can you write nicer stories? Nicer worlds?

I write things I can imagine, he said. I can’t create things I could never possibly imagine.

Months later, my son wrote another piece, a similar sort of piece, about a banker who lived a life of indescribable luck. Every day the banker received adoration, gifts, and support. But about forty miles away from the banker, people would die. An invisible circle with a radius about forty miles, no more than forty miles, no less than forty miles, from the banker, was where many people would die. It was a force of nature, this invisible circle around the banker, where people died. The banker never knew he was the cause of their deaths. He thought the people he met simply disappeared from his life, and he never gave it much thought.

He continued comfortably, until his children grew up and left home. But the moment they left his sight and crossed that invisible circle, they died like all the others. He assumed his children just wanted nothing to do with him, when they disappeared and never came back. And he simply went on, never knowing why his children, and many others, never came back. There was no Rope Man in this story. But I read it again and again, looking for some sign that the Rope Man was around.

Do you know what the story is about? I asked my daughter.

I don’t think they’re supposed to be about things, she said. The stories are the stories. What did it make you feel?

I am not sure what it made me feel.

Maybe think about that then, she said.

And I did. Whether I wanted to or not, that is what I did. The story made me feel unfocused and unsettled. I felt a connection to the lucky banker, though I couldn’t say why. I started thinking of my wife, and her death in the state hospitals after the birth of my daughter, though I couldn’t say why.

There was no reason for the association. The story said nothing of state hospitals or births. But I thought of her again. I thought of how she disappeared from my sight. I thought of how many people disappeared from my sight, and I had no way of knowing if they were coming back either.

I started seeing longer shadows. People talking. I worried that they were talking about my son, or about us.

A man with a crooked nose walked through our neighborhood. The crooked nose was bent at the bridge, indicating it had been broken several ways, long ago. His eyes were unreadable and unmoving, like he only had interest in capturing the images in front of him but not studying them in depth. And I recognized him, from idle neighborhood talk, as our man in the blue house. It was a rare thing, to see the man in a blue house outside on the street rather than inside a house. Why was the man in the blue house outside rather than inside the blue house? And why was he looking my way? Why was he looking at me?

He nodded.

I nodded back.

He smiled.

I smiled back.

It was not long after I saw the man in the blue house and smiled, that my son finally wrote the story about the deviant.

The deviant story was particularly popular at the time of publication.

The deviant was a character who became excited whenever people told him he did something incorrectly. There was nothing more he enjoyed than doing things incorrectly, so that people would tell him he had done things incorrectly. His greatest fear, more than death, was fading away from existence. His thoughts were so twisted, that he believed his degradation was a strange form of immortality, because it made him so prominent in people’s minds and memories.

The deviant employed several men to effectuate his perversions. They sounded similar to the Rope Man from the other stories, these men. And they would gather people up for the deviant, like fodder, to tell the deviant he had done things incorrectly and satisfy his needs. The story ended with the deviant reaching orgasm in front of a giant crowd of hateful people, brought just to scream at him. Or perhaps he wasn’t orgasming, perhaps he was ascending to another level of existence, like his mind was no longer limited to his physical form, because he had achieved such an extreme level of incorrect bliss, of immortality, like he had always dreamed. The text made it very difficult to tell what happened, to be frank.

This one made me the most uncomfortable. It made me uncomfortable because of what was said, but also because of what was not said. The deviant bore a striking resemblance to the First Citizen. Little things about the character, mannerisms, the color of his hair, the way he spoke, reminded me of the First Citizen.

Is this a satire? Of the First Citizen?

My son would not answer the question.

Satire was, of course, permissible, encouraged. But my son would not say whether or not the work was satire. I found it frustrating and concerning. And I grew more concerned when the stories became more widely read.

I worked at the train station near our country’s border, much as I do now. Greeting foreigners and visitors, like you, I would direct them to the information booth or the local processing hall, much as I do now. And I would see commuters, travelers, exchanging newspapers and tracts. I could see the magazines that carried my son’s stories, more and more of them, floating around.

A co-worker told me he’d read my son’s stories and found them intriguing.

Why? I asked. Why do you find his stories intriguing?

I don’t know, my co-worker admitted. I’m afraid I just do.

You’re afraid you just do, I repeated.

Yes, he said, and that was all. I’m afraid I just do.

After the usual prayers for their mother and before our Sunday supper, I told my son, I’d like to know the point. Of these stories. I’d like to know the point. He and my daughter looked at one another and did not speak for a time.

There is no point, he answered. Not in the way you mean, at least.

But in some way. You may not think I understand much, and I may not understand much. But I see that it’s there. I am worried about how people will think and how they will interpret these things because of what’s there.

Well, my son replied, I cannot control how people will think or interpret these things. My job is to be attuned to the way we are living. And, if you are attuned, sometimes what you create seems a certain way to others. I cannot control how it is interpreted or how it seems to others.

You could write it differently. You could write it more clearly.

If it’s not clear, maybe the way we are living is not clear.

What does that mean?

You know what that means.

My son and daughter silently flitted their hands in signals to one another. Rapidly, they went back and forth while I ate, annoyed. The wind was quiet, and no one was listening. But I was still annoyed. My son knew he was going a way that would make people unhappy, make me unhappy, but he was still going.

Is this really what a writer is? I asked.

I don’t know about other writers. I only know about me, he said. And even then, I am not sure I always know about that.

My son’s work continued, and as it continued, it attracted the attention of certain elements. You can probably guess which elements those were. In our country, they refer to themselves as the Fallow. In your country, they may go by another name. The Fallow is a reference to a famous revolutionary poem about drained farmlands. A reference to soil, rocks, bugs, dreaming wearily of recovery, in this revolutionary poem. The goals of the Fallow, as I understood them, were to overthrow the First Citizen and his men, and replace them with some other kind of governance.

I did not see the Fallow come to our home (they never appear to people like me), but my son said he saw them, that they came specifically for him. They overrode signals in the mirrors and glass one night. He said he was in his bedroom, and one of the Fallow appeared within the glass, a strange face, blurred behind my son’s reflection within that glass.

We read your story about the deviant, they apparently told him. My son said the voice sounded empty, synthetic. The face was partially flesh and partially something embedded in that flesh. The hands of the speaker were stiff and metallic, replaced with augmented prostheses. Claw-like, the telltale sign of the Fallow. They divested themselves of certain parts to gain others, or so the rumors said.

The ending of the deviant story. Did the deviant die? Some among us believe the ending implies that the deviant may have orgasmed and then died.

My son, both frightened and perhaps set in his ways of writing, did not answer.

This story, your story, has been flagged by several Bureaus. As we speak, memos are being written to analyze associated risks. Many analysts are interpreting this as veiled political criticism. But its ambiguity makes it more dangerous than typical criticism.

I cannot control if others believe it is dangerous, my son replied.

The problem with ambiguity is that it demands interpretation. The demand for interpretation welcomes a different magnitude of contemplation and unanticipated dispute. Already, the Bureaus are seeing influence in other writings. And reductions in worker productivity in regions exposed to these writings, more so than happens with permissible criticism. They will inevitably determine that these stories go beyond permissible criticism.

If that is what they decide, that is what they decide, my son said.

Do you hate the First Citizen? Do you wish for his death? Is this story about how you wish for his death?

My son did not answer.

If you tell us, we can help you. We can help you, if you tell us. There are dedicated functions, established places, for alternative views and dissidence. But before we can help, we must be sure of the precise intent. We may require a demonstration of that intent.

My son continued to give no answer.

Words matter. Do you not agree?

Words matter, my son repeated. It was a phrase often uttered by the Fallow and their sympathizers. It was meant to distinguish their cause from the obtuse First Citizen, his officials, and their enforcers in the Bureaus, for whom words carried little weight. I want to agree, my son answered. But I’m not sure I would always agree. Experiences matter. Actions matter. But words are only signifiers, means, for both. They are not an end in themselves. I don’t write words because of the words.

Why then?

Again, my son did not provide them with an answer. After several more questions with unproductive results, the Fallow faded away from behind the glass, and my son found himself alone in his bedroom, again.

I asked him, later, if he did not answer those questions because he was afraid it was some kind of ruse. Or perhaps because he did not hate the First Citizen. Or perhaps because the men in blue houses were somehow listening in to the signal.

No, my son replied. Those were not my reasons. Declarations to the Fallow, affirmative or negative, would be contrary to the stories. I am happy to make declarations elsewhere, to state my views, to pick one thing or the other thing, in other ways, separate and apart from the stories. But admitting one meaning, one purpose, within those stories, precludes other possibilities within those stories.

And that was precisely the trouble within those stories, I realized.

The possibilities.

It was because of the possibilities that the ideas stuck like tiny fishbones in the throat, not easily eaten and forgotten.

I would hand out pamphlets to visitors at the train station who were thinking of immigrating. I would point to posters of the First Citizen as I explained our naturalization policies, and in the back of my mind, I would still be thinking about that deviant. Against my will, a link had been made somewhere in my brain that I could not unlink. I kept thinking about the First Citizen, surrounded by men and women yelling at him, and his orgasming, or ascension, or death. And the powerful, stern, paternal image of the First Citizen was replaced by a perverted shadow.

Each time I halted my car at a bridge crossing, or drove by a bank, or ate chicken, I would think about the stories. There was an unexpressed dread, a potential energy that was more ominous because it refused the catharsis of full articulation.

One night, I woke to low voices in the house.

I crept to the door and peered, unsure if I had even fully woken, out at two shapes sitting in chairs in the living room. I could not see clearly, but I knew one shape to be my son. I would know that shape, even if I could not perceive any other detail, to be my son.

The other shape, however, was not my daughter. It was a strange man. In the puzzlework of light and darkness in the room, I could make out the angles of a crooked nose broken in several places. It was the man in the blue house, inside of our house, I realized.

And the man in the blue house, now inside of our house—he held something. It looked long, and it dangled there, like a cord. I recognized it as a Bureau restraint, though I’d never seen one this close. A hempen material designed to be worn like a noose around the neck, as well as the wrists and ankles from several shorter branching cords. Something about the patented hempen material was painful and prevented a captive from straining. They also could generate a small shock to the nervous system if necessary. From behind the door, where I stood, it looked much like rope to me.

My son said something, like he was answering a question.

I have my theories, he said.

What are your theories? The man in the blue house in our house asked.

I suspect clarity is a comfort to you. It’s finite and enclosed. You can argue with it, disavow it, disprove it, undermine it. It is also short-lived. An opinion, once stated, is accepted or rejected and disappears into the void. Do you agree?

I do agree.

There is also inherent power in asymmetric ambiguity. You are allowed to have multiple meanings, to keep things veiled. Citizens do not have that right. Their minds have to be open to inspection. And you have learned that most people are actually quite eager for inspection when they think of it as presentation. Do you agree with that as well?

I do agree.

Something you fear, then, is the art which obscures, for two reasons. The first is because of you. You cannot see how it moves, who it moves through, why, and how deeply. The second is because of us. Because when we do not understand something, we question, we grasp, and we connect. Even if the connection makes no technical sense, we create the connections. With each other, with ideas, with something else. We empathize. We engage. We become unpredictable and unknowable. That is mystery, faith, compassion, whatever number of words you want to give to the compulsion you cannot circumscribe. Things you’d prefer we forget.

The man in the blue house in our house sat perfectly still.

And it felt as though I were not watching my son and a stranger, but representatives of something else, as though they were speaking for others I could not see. Something old before our time, or so advanced that I would not live to comprehend it. They were themselves, but they were something else. I said I knew the shape of my son, but that was incorrect. I knew the shape of the boy I had given life and raised and talked to at the dinner table, but not the whole of him. I felt as though I were the child, not the parent, back there, eavesdropping on matters beyond my simplified world.

My son looked in my direction, and I pulled back from the doorway.

We should continue this conversation elsewhere, I heard my son say. I will go with you. Let’s leave this house be and take the conversation elsewhere.

I listened, waited, for the two men to leave, and I did not sleep for the rest of the night.

The next day, I received a letter of congratulations.

My son was being honored for his writing and taken to further his education in the far fields. There, he would be given an opportunity to write other stories, wonderful stories, that would no doubt be improved by his time in the far fields. He was promised to return from the far fields upon his request, but no one ever requested a return from the far fields as far as we knew.

My daughter read the letter and screamed. She slapped me across the face twice. She went to her room and did not come out to see me. She was unspeakably angry and blamed me for something. I did not understand, and I also understood perfectly.

I sat quietly with the letter. I felt tears I didn’t know I was still capable of crying. I went to my son’s room and sat on his bed. I sat with the letter, I thought of my son, and I sat in his room and on that bed.

I tried to imagine him working in the far fields, the way we had been told. I tried to dream of it, too, when exhaustion inevitably came to take me away from my repetitive thoughts. But I couldn’t see it, or him, in the far fields, not even inside my head, where I wanted to see him most.

In the weeks after, I read and reread his stories. I was not so much looking for things in the stories. I just wanted to hear his voice. And something about the detached way I read the stories this time made me appreciate them more. There was a wryness I did not pick up the first time when I was trying to place the words within my rigid understanding. A certain sense that this was a game, a game that did not suit a rigid understanding.

One evening, I found the dusty pages of an unfinished piece in my son’s desk. It was called, “In My Country.” It seemed like it was written when he was very young. I suspect he did not finish it, because he felt it was immature and too direct for his liking. It was not as layered or careful as the stories he wrote later. It was about a little family in a little house in a little neighborhood. A father told his children, very confidently, that they could be at ease, because even though kings were something to be feared, there was no king in their country. One of his children questioned that belief. I had difficulty reading the story, and I was grateful when it stopped. Then I reread the story and found myself wishing that it had not stopped.

Stories were released by the Bureaus in the next few months, released under my son’s name in state-edited magazines. Supposedly written from the far fields, these were stories of perfect clarity, fables, digestible moral quandaries, easily untangled. Stories that were not in my son’s voice but were in my son’s name in these magazines.

These stories were not as popular, and I understood, now, why that would be.

Not long after was when my daughter said she was leaving the house.

She left, but before she left, she told me she forgave me.

I said I did not do anything that needed forgiveness.

There was something wrong with her hands, when she told me she was leaving and that she forgave me. She was hiding them in her coat pockets. And her voice was different too. There was a certainty to her posture and tenor that made her almost unrecognizable.

No. I forgive you for everything you did not do, she said. We all do different things, but we all do something. The one thing we cannot afford to do is nothing.

Oh, was all I could bring myself to reply.

Days later, I was woken by a strange tide of lights and sirens, in a time long after the night-work starting bell had last rung, when there should have been little light or sound. I emerged from my son’s room, out into the street, where others in the neighborhood had gathered in the darkness, in their bathrobes. Emergency vehicles were caravaned around the blue house.

They tried to hide the grotesquery behind plastic sheets, but we could see from the curbside, a body. It had been strung up by a hempen cord and tied in an unusual position, like a tangled marionette with broken limbs. Between the flesh and the cord I recognized a crooked nose, red and purple, and empty eyes, staring from the blue eaves.

An investigator took me aside with a firm grip and a sober expression.

At the time of the incident, the man in the blue house had been in conversation.

In conversation?

With your daughter.

With my daughter?

I am so sorry to inform you that she was killed in the attack too. We cannot announce this yet, but the Fallow were involved. It was very unfortunate, and she was caught in the crossfire. I’m sorry to tell you, but she is dead. Your daughter is dead. It will be some time before we can release the cremated remains. Ongoing investigation. You understand.

Dead?

My mind reeled emptily, then settled in our home, at the table, over Sunday supper. To conversation about things, what they meant and what they didn’t mean. I listened to what the investigator said and what he didn’t say.

Dead?

The investigator looked perplexed. Yes?

Dead?

Yes.

Dead? I smiled.

Yes.

Dead. I laughed.

He recommended that I go home and told me I would be contacted when the cremated remains were ready. He apologized again. I told him I would have no need for the remains. I had no need for any of those remains. I left the scene, the neighbors watching, whispering, while I laughed and went home and sat in the darkness again.

People know me here as the man with one child who is alive and one child who is dead. They are right, in a certain way, and in a certain way, they are not.

The train station where I work is quieter than before. Like the whole country, all quieter than everything before. They are having a harder time filling it, though they do not say it. Just like the schools, hospitals, factories, offices, everything is quieter. And with those changes, the First Citizen and his Bureaus have shifted their stricter immigration positions, relaxed certain policies to stimulate an influx of labor. It was not that way yesterday and may not be that way tomorrow. But for today, for now, they demand the influx of labor.

So, I explain the way of things, in the country, in accord with certain procedures. But sometimes, I wander a little with what I say and don’t say. There are fewer men in blue houses to listen to the wind, to listen to me wander with what I say and don’t say. I like to share passages from my son’s work. I’d like to share this one, from his unfinished story, if you don’t mind.

My father says there is no king. What I believe he really means, whether he knows it or not, is that there are many kings. Neighborhood kings, city kings, money kings, legal kings, machine kings, political kings. There is no singular king, yes, and no one king by that title, but there are many who think they bear the mantle nonetheless. They surround us. Suffocate us. They step on our backs. They coordinate without even knowing they coordinate to coerce and control.

But now I think my father was correct in a different way. Unintentionally, maybe. But secretly, accidentally correct. There is no king.

There is no one, or many, who can rule for long. They can divide and categorize and simplify to make the rest of us forget a greater thing. Make themselves forget that they, too, are part of that greater thing. But they are not above or below or beside or apart for long.

They know there is no king.

I know there is no king.

There is no king.

I think about this passage often. I repeat this one to new arrivals, like yourself, most often. I am not clever like my son or brave like my daughter. But still, I think about their stories and talk at the dinner table, and I find myself repeating this passage most often.

I spend the days watching the train windows, the series of glass panels, pulling in, pulling away from the platform, and sometimes, I see a static charge, and with it a blurred, almost unrecognizable face, partly flesh, partly something else, looking back from behind each reflection that passes me by. The blurred face behind the reflection does not look at me directly when I smile. She is not ready to look at me, I think. But that is fine. I am just glad she is still there watching and passing me by.

Just like I’m glad when I sleep, and I can almost see another face in an unbroken darkness, obscured. A shape of someone I know and do not completely know at the same time. A voice that is his voice and my voice, blended together, so that I can’t tell who is speaking anymore, whether it is him or it is me. And in that other place, I share my thoughts without fear. Everything that I say. Everything that I don’t say. I share it all.